Thoughts on Physical Preparedness

Author: Christian Madajski
Date: 02-21-2022

Outline:

- the current fitness landscape
	> driven by money first principles
	> systems leverage uniqueness to gain attention/circus tricks
	> traditional sports are arbitrary/legacy
	> no one considers scientific elements
- start from the basics/bottom up
	> why do we do anything?
	> individuality is real
	> what do you care about?
	> lack of knowledge leads to exploration
- know your group/scene
	> based on your values, find those who are on that path
	> your path is probably pretty narrow
- scientific foundations
	> SAID: you become exactly what you do
	> steady state: do something continuously at a given level
	> accomodation: change stops eventually
	> escalation: periodically change parameters
	> volatility: be ready for unexpected circumstances
	> understand tissue responses (muscle, tendon, neural, etc)
- the issue of dose
	> sport make it easy/limit variables
	> real life is messy/prepare for the worst
	> dose is dynamic, but less dynamic for sport
	> always remember what you need


The modern fitness industry is an enormous and diverse beast. I wouldn't be surprised if
most average people trying to figure out what they should do for physical wellbeing are
hopelessly lost. The whole industry is a black hole of sales pitches and circus acts.
Like all industries, it is sustained by clueless people paying money to mostly snake
oil salespeople. It also doesn't help that sports add yet another angle to how people
are "supposed" to train. A majority of this information is pure noise. Only a foundational
understanding of movement can cut throught the B.S. I will attempt to assemble a framework
for sensible physical expression in this document.

At the most foundational level, we must ask ourselves why do we even move at all?
Well, we are obviously not stationary organisms like anemones or plants. The elements
we need for survival typically reside outside of our immediate reach. Therefore, we 
must move to get them. How we move is largely a function of our structure. Our structure
is a reflection of what obstacles we have historically needed to overcome to get what we
need. In the case of humans, things are quite complicated. We inherited many features
from apes that we do not use in the same way our ancestors did. We are in a unique 
position where our structures have been repurposed for what we want to accomplish.
Opposable thumbs allow us to use a variety of tools. Dexterous fingers type on keyboards.
I must pull myself away from this deep tangent, but it's important to consider how
our movement complexity in daily life pales in comparison to what we are capable of.
This is a consequence of how we have built modernity. There is a LOT of capability
being left on the table for humans, and not using that capacity has consequences.
I should try to return to this idea later when it's more appropriate.

So the big question people are left asking is "what should we do?" Well, the real
answer is somewhat vague and unsatisfying. All organisms become what they do over
large timescales. In the context of modern humans, we don't really need to do much.
Humans have entered an era where they create their own destinies. Most people are
stuck in the endless loop of mimetic desire, chasing what everyone else is doing
for the sake of remaining in some sort of in-group. I am repulsed by this, but
no one cares about what some weirdo hermit thinks. It seems like most humans
follow those precious evolutionary urges to find a tribe and do like the others do.
Then they become surprised when issues arise due to the inadequacies of their 
given activities.

Understanding the Foundations of Movement

I think the best place to start is with the SAID principle. SAID stands for
specific adaptation to imposed demand. Organisms become exactly what they do.
This seems to be a universal biological phenomenon. This principle seems very
obvious, but it is so rarely considered by people when talking about movement
that it must not be THAT obvious. There are whole cults of fitness people that
worship gods like The Almighty Deadlift or The Unyielding Burpee. Only
performing this ONE thing will make you virtuous and solve all your life
problems. It's all absolute hogwash. Doing something makes you better at that
thing. There could be some carryover to something else, but ultimately doing
the specific thing only transfers to that exact activity. People violate this
principle so often that it boggles my mind. Doing calf raises with a barbell
on your back is NOT the way to get a higher vertical. Deadlifting 500 pounds
is a terrible way to improve your sprinting speed if you never sprint.
Swimming laps in the pool is a terrible way to improve your 10k times.
The things you do and the way you do them impose specific stresses on
specific tissues. If you change one variable (speed, duration, intensity, etc)
then different tissues get the stimulus. People pretend like it doesn't
matter but it does.

Next we can dive into steady state training. Essentially all organisms follow
this model when it comes to doing things. Every organism at some point in
time is capable of doing something. If an organism desires more function, 
then it can push itself into a higher state of function for a limited time.
If this state of function is maintained at a suitable level for enough time,
then the organism morphs into something slightly different than before. 
If the organism is pushed to hard, it dips into survival mode and
peformance drops off a cliff. If it pushes to the edge, then it might just
die. It is commonplace today in communities like CrossFit to push like hell.
Often times, people don't realize they're destroying themselves through
a mixture of pushing too hard too fast and pushing for too many consecutive
days. The intensity is too high and the frequency doesn't conform to
biological rhythms.
