Insect-Plant Relationships

Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnNOvA3diDU

Dr. Thomas Dykstra talking with John Kempf on the dynamics between 
insects and plants, specifically insect herbivory (insects eating 
plants) and how we can apply this information to agricultural systems.

> THESIS: insects only feed on plants that are considered unfit, 
nutritionally inferior, dead, or dying.

Humans currently operate under the assumption that we are in 
competition with insects for food. This idea is fueled by the 
obsevation that many modern crops experience decreased yields
due to insect infestations. While insects are undoubtedly the
cause of these crop losses, we must understand the context of
these crop plants to explain why insects would even be interested
in them at all.

In general, insects exist in niches that share a common theme:
they consume material that organisms at higher trophic levels 
(higher in the food chain) do not consume.Termites consume 
wood products because practically no other organisms can. 
Dung beetles consume the undigested lignin and byproducts
expelled by higher-order organisms in feces. If these 
insects did not perform their tasks within their niche,
we would have severe excesses in certain materials on
Earth because they would never be processed or processing
would take place over much greater time scales. The key 
point to understand here is that insects are part of the
clean up crew for the biological world.

Switching gears to plants... [WIP]

Quantitative Plant Health
So how do we assess if a plant is healthy? The common indicators 
used are:
- is it tall?
- does it grow fast?
- is it green?
- is is DARK green?
- does it produce a lot of yield?

All of these indicators are insufficient for understanding a 
plant's health. The quickest and easiest way to diagnose a
plant's health status is using brix. Brix uses light to 
approximate the amount of sugar currently flowing through 
a plant's vascular system (as sap). We now know that plants
are essentially solar factories that use sunlight to capture
carbon to synthesize compounds. This carbon is transported as 
"sugars" in the sap. The more sugar in the sap, the more the
plant is fulfilling its purpose and the healthier/more resilient
the plant will be.

Plant Brix Levels
1-2: barely alive, force-feeding required for survival
2-8: alive, but vulnerable, lack 
8-12: partially independent, partial insect resistance
12+: completely independent, high insect resistance

Factors Influencing Brix
1. Sunlight
2. Water
3. Air
4. Nutrients

Brix Levels Where Insects Lose Interest
Aphids: 6-8
Sucking Insects: 7-9
Chewing Insects: 9-11
Grasshoppers: 10-12
